in 1928 a solitary mountaineer exploring
the karakoram mountains in india
encounters a glowing sphere he loses
consciousness and when he wakes
the sphere has gone and there is a scar
on his hand where a sample of his dna
has been taken
in the present day a rapidly moving
object is detected beyond jupiter's
orbit and forecast to impact manhattan
it is moving at 30 000 kilometers per
second
enough to destroy all life on earth the
united states government hastily
assembles a group of scientists
including helen benson and her friend
michael granier to develop a survival
plan
the scientists travel to new york city
to await for the object's collision with
earth
as it nears the planet the object slows
down just before impact
revealed to be a large spherical
spaceship it lands gently in central
park and is quickly surrounded by nypd
and heavily armed us military forces
an alien emerges and helen moves forward
to greet it
but amidst the confusion the alien is
shot
a gigantic humanoid robot appears and
temporarily disables everything in the
vicinity by emitting a high-pitched
noise before the wounded alien voices
the command clay tobarada nicto to shut
down the robot's defensive response
the alien's exterior is found to be a
bioengineered spacesuit
composed of placenta-like material
covering a human-like being
after the bullet is extracted during
surgery the being quickly ages into
clato
who looks like the mountaineer from
1928.
clayton informs secretary of defense
regina jackson that he is a
representative of a group of
civilizations
sent to talk to the leaders of earth
about saving the planet
when jackson instead sends him to be
interrogated clayton escapes and
reconnects with helen and her stepson
jacob telling them that he must finish
his mission to save the earth
the presence of the sphere and other
smaller spheres that begin to appear all
over the world cause widespread panic
the military launches a drone attack on
the central park sphere
but are thwarted by the robot the
military takes a weapons-free approach
cautiously enclosing the robot soon
nicknamed gort
for genetically organized robotic
technology and transporting it to the
mount weather underground facility in
virginia
clayton meets with another alien mr wu
who has lived on earth for 70 years
wu tells clayton that he has found the
human race to be destructive
stubborn and unwilling to change which
matches clayton's experiences
clayto orders the smaller spheres to
collect specimens of animal species
to preserve them for later
reintroduction to the earth
he clarifies for helen that he means to
save the earth from destruction by
humankind
when a new jersey state trooper attempts
to take them into custody
clay who kills him then promptly revives
the officer telling helen
and jacob that he did this to simply
disarm an obstacle to his mission
hoping to persuade clayton to change his
mind about humanity
helen takes him to the home of professor
barnhart a nobel prize winner
they discuss how clayton's race went
through drastic collaborative evolution
to prevent the demise of their planet
barnhart pleads that earth is at the
same precipice and humanity should be
given a chance to understand that it too
must change
while the adults are talking jacob calls
the authorities to come and arrest
clayton
while the military is examining gort the
robot transforms into a swarm of winged
insect-like nano-machines that
self-replicate as they consume every
man-made object in their path
the swarm soon devours the entire
facility emerging above ground to
continue feeding
the military capture helen while clayton
and jacob escape on foot
as they travel clayton learns more about
humanity through jacob
when jacob contacts helen and arranges
to meet at his father's grave
the secretary sends her to try to change
clayton's mind
at the grave jacob is heartbroken that
clayton cannot resurrect his long-dead
father
as helen and jacob have a tear-filled
reunion clayton's cumulative
observations of humans convince him to
stop the swarm
grainier drives them to the central park
sphere but the swarm has reached massive
proportions
clayton trudges through the swarm to the
sphere touching it moments before his
own body is consumed
the sphere deactivates the swarm saving
humanity
but at the expense of electrical
activity on earth percleta's warning
that there will be a price to the human
way of life
the giant sphere leaves the earth